ForgeGradle Configurations
==========================

ForgeGradle has numerous configurations that can change how the development environment is configured. Most configurations are set using the `minecraft` block; however, some others can be specified within the `dependencies` block or modify the built `jar`, such as `reobfJar`.

Enabling Access Transformers
----------------------------

[Access Transformers][at] can widen the visibility or modify the `final` flag of Minecraft classes, methods, and fields. To enable access transformers in the production environment, you can set `accessTransformer` to configuration file in question:

```gradle
minecraft {
    // ...

    // Add an access transformer file relative to the project's directory
    accessTransformer = project.file('src/main/resources/META-INF/accesstransformer.cfg')
}
```

!!! important
    While the access transformer in the development environment can be read from anywhere the user specifies, in production, the file will only be read from `META-INF/accesstransformer.cfg`.

Human-Readable Mappings
-----------------------

Minecraft's source code is obfuscated. As such, all classes, methods, and fields have machine-generated names with no package structures. Function-local variable names, meanwhile, are turned into a snowman (`☃`) due to how the Local Variable Table is stored. It is difficult to create mods using obfuscated names as reverse engineering them is tedious, may change between versions, and may be invalid in the language itself but not in the bytecode.

To address the last two issues, Forge fuzzily maps each class, method, field, and parameter to a unique identifier, known as the SRG name, via the [ForgeAutoRenamingTool][fart]. SRG mappings are used in production when the game is being run by the user client.

To allow easier development, ForgeGradle allows the user to choose a mapping set to apply on top of SRG mappings, which we will refer to as human-readable mappings. ForgeGradle knows how to convert the mod jar to SRG mappings for use in production via the `reobf*` task.

The mapping set used can be specified by setting the `mappings` field in the `minecraft` block. The `mappings` field takes in two arguments: `channel` which is the type of the mapping set, and `version` which is the version of the mapping set to apply.

Currently, there are three default mapping sets built into ForgeGradle:

* `official` - This uses the mapping set provided by Mojang. These mappings do not have parameter names and only exist from 1.14 onward.
* `stable` - This uses a mapping set generated by MCP. These are typically incomplete and no longer exist as of 1.17.
* `snapshot` - This also is a mapping set generated by MCP, similar to a nightly build of a program. These are also typically incomplete and no longer exist as of 1.17.

!!! note
    The class names used in production are from `stable` prior to 1.17 and from `official` from 1.17 onwards.

```gradle
mappings {
    // Sets the mappings to use those from Mojang for Minecraft 1.19.4.
    mappings channel: 'official', version: '1.19.4'

    // ...
}
```

### Parchment

Parchment is an official project maintained by ParchmentMC which provides open, community-sourced parameter names and javadocs on top of the `official` mapping set. You can learn how setup and use the parchment mapping set on [their website][parchment].

Preparing Run Tasks
-------------------

Run tasks (`run*`) have two separate pipelines depending on whether they are executed through `gradlew` or a run configuration. By default, there are two tasks that prepare the workspace for execution:

First, there is the `prepare*` tasks which extract and apply the relevant mappings for execution in a development environment. Within an integrated development environment (IDE), the mod sources are not compiled by default, as it is unnecessary. Next, there are the `prepare*Compile` tasks which compiles the mod sources. This is used in conjunction within the `prepare*` tasks to execute a run configuration directly through `gradlew`, or if the relevant setting is enabled through the run configuration.

If your IDE is either Eclipse or IntelliJ IDEA, the run configuration can be configured to execute the `prepare*Compile` tasks before starting the game by setting `enableEclipsePrepareRuns` or `enableIdeaPrepareRuns`, respectively, to `true`.

```gradle
minecraft {
    // ...

    // Enable the prepare*Compile task for run configurations
    enableEclipsePrepareRuns true
    enableIdeaPrepareRuns true
}
```

### Copy IDE Resources

The `copyIdeResources` property can be used to copy resources configured by the `processResources` task to the IDE's resource output directories. This allows run configurations not using the `prepare*Compile` task to use buildscript configurable resources. This only applies to Eclipse and IntelliJ IDEA via the `copyEclipseResources` and `copyIntellijResources` tasks, respectively.

```gradle
minecraft {
    // ...

    // Copies the files from 'processResources' to the IDE's resource output directories
    copyIdeResources true
}
```

### Run Configuration Folders

Run configurations can be sorted into folders if the `generateRunFolders` is set to `true`. This reads the `folderName` property set in the specific [run configuration][run] to determine the organizational structure.

```gradle
minecraft {
    // ...

    // When true, run configurations will be grouped into folders by their 'folderName'
    generateRunFolders true
}
```

[at]: https://docs.minecraftforge.net/en/latest/advanced/accesstransformers/
[fart]: https://github.com/MinecraftForge/ForgeAutoRenamingTool
[parchment]: https://parchmentmc.org/docs/getting-started
[run]: ./runs.md#run-configurations
